---
layout: post
title: Pig
subtitle: A Communication Primitive to Form Quorums
# cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
# thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
# share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [Communication primitive, Consensus, Quorum, Communication bottleneck]
# author: Hasan Heydari
---

The leader constitutes a communication bottleneck in leader-based state machine replication (SMR) protocols like Multi-Paxos and HotStuff.
Specifically, in each phase of a consensus instance, a non-leader process (follower) receives one message from the leader and sends one message back; however, in a system with $n$ processes, the leader needs to send $n-1$ messages to the followers, and receive at least a quorum of messages back from them.
Therefore, scaling such protocols requires reducing the disproportionate load on the leader.
[PigPaxos: Devouring the Communication Bottlenecks in Distributed Consensus](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3448016.3452834) addresses communication bottleneck imposed by leaders and improves the throughput of leader-based SMR protocols by introducing Pig, a communication primitive to form quorums.
Before delving into Pig, let us see how quorums are formed in most SMR protocols, such as Multi-Paxos and HotStuff.

#### Traditional quorum formation protocols
Assume that the size of any quorum is $q$.
Any process can form a quorum by executing the formQuorum function.

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
// Code for process i

function formQuorum()
   sq = generate a unique sequence number
   send <FormQuorum, sq> to all processes
   quorum = ∅
   loop 
      wait until receiving a message <AckFormQuorum, sq> from j
         quorum = quorum U {j}
   until |quorum| >= q
   return quorum

upon receiving a message <FormQuorum, sq> from process j
   send <AckFormQuorum, sq> to j
{% endhighlight %}

We are now ready to see how Pig forms quorums.

#### Pig: a communication primitive to form quorums
Pig is a communication primitive to form quorums.
Again, assume that the size of any quorum is $q$.
Any process can form a quorum by executing the formQuorumPig function.

{% highlight pseudocode linenos %}
// Code for process i

function formQuorumPig()
   start a timer
   sq = generate a unique sequence number
   send <FormQuorumRelay, sq> to the members of i.Relays
   quorum = ∅
   loop 
      upon receiving a message <AckFormQuorumRelay, sub_quorum> from j
         quorum = quorum U sub_quorum U {j}
   until timer is expired or |quorum| >= q
   return quorum

upon receiving a message <FormQuorumRelay, sq> from process j
   start a timer
   send <FormQuorumFollower, sq> to the members of i.Followers
   sub_quorum = ∅
   loop
      upon receiving a message <AckFormQuorumFollower, sq> from k
         sub_quorum = sub_quorum U {k}
   until timer is expired or |sub_quorum| >= p
   send <AckFormQuorumRelay, sub_quorum> to j

upon receiving a message <FormQuorumFollower, sq> from process j
   send <AckFormQuorumFollower, sq> to j
{% endhighlight %}

**Remarks**
- Each process $i$ has a set of relay processes denoted by $i.Relays$.
  This set can be static (i.e., pre-configured) or dynamic (i.e., selected randomly during execution).
- Each relay process $i$ has a set of followers denoted by $i.Followers$.
  This set can also be static or dynamic.
- A process might follow multiple relay processes.
- This protocol has two important parameters: $q$ and $p$ that are the size of quorums and the number of responses that a relay process needs to receive in order to send a response to the process that wants to form a quorum.
- In the paper there is no analytical result for computing the probability of forming of a quorum based on the number of relays, the number of followers that each relay has, etc.
  Instead, the paper only presents some numerical evaluations.
